README.md, before:

# Pragmatic GraphQL
A hype-free guide to GraphQL for server-side developers, with a touch of snark

## Introduction

### What is GraphQL
GraphQL is a new RPC system. That is, it is in the same category as REST, Webservices/SOAP, gRPC, XML-RPC and CORBA.

### Advantages
The key distinctive of GraphQL is that it gives the API client fine-grained control over the fields returned from an API call (the data shape). This addresses a number of issues around over-requesting, that are present in most other RPC systems.

### Disadvantages
GraphQL is not a mature technology for general-purpose use. A number of operational and development considerations are not adequately addressed at the moment (as of late 2019).

## Community

### Context
The GraphQL movement is actually 3 things:
1. The internal communication protocol for a specific technology stack (Apollo/Relay).
2. A reaction against some of the more onerous aspects of the dominant RESTful approach to implementing API's, with it's roots in a specific part of the software engineering community.
3. A tool for creating flexible general-purpose API's.

It is helpful to remember this context because whilst a lot of the online discussion about GraphQL appears to be about point 3 (GraphQL as an API technology), in reality it is often about points 1 or 2. I suspect sometimes the authors are not clear on this distinction either :-/

## Requests

### Network Protocol
Requests are implemented as a text body in a HTTP(S) POST to a single URL (it is also possible, but unwise, to use HTTP GET with a URL-encoded GraphQL request). Responses usually have HTTP status code 200, but some servers may use a HTTP status of 400 for some errors.

### Operations
There are 3 types of request (called "operations"). Functionally, here's what they mean

1. "query": Function call with parameters, parallel execution, structured response
2. "mutation": Function call with parameters, blocking sequential execution, structured response
3. "subscription": Function call with parameters, structured response with server-push streaming data

### Errors
Over the wire, responses usually have HTTP status code 200, even if there was a functional error. As-of 2020, there is also a trend to use HTTP status code 400 if there was an error resolving any field in the response (although the remainder of the response would still be returned as per normal semantics). Note that GraphQL clients should also be prepared to handle HTTP status code 500 (for catastrophic server errors), along with network errors.

The approach of using HTTP 400 for any field errors needs to be be discussed in a bit more detail. It has the advantage of utilising the builtin status-code error handling in the HTTP clients that every GraphQL client is built on, so that errors can be guaranteed to result in a client-side error - rather than having a badly written client blindly rely on incomplete data, for instance. However, the disadvantage is that detailed error handling is discarded in favour of an all-or-nothing status code (eg. there is no distinction between bad query structure, a missing object, and an internal timeout fetching data - let alone partial data responses). My opinion is that if you are going to create a network-protocol-independent API system, then it doesn't make sense to partially break that paradigm for the sake of misbehaving client-side code - so it seems wisest to avoid this pattern.

There is an unofficial extension for embedding error information into the graphql response (Apollo error format). There is a further extension-extension for embedding error codes into the error information for programmatic error handling (`error_code` field). However, there are no extension-extension-extension's for well-defined error codes or annotating your schema to indicate valid error codes for particular fields or operations

## Types

### Gotchas
* input types (`input`) are different from return types (`type`). This is a bad idea.
* input types have a lot of limitations. No good reason, just cause.
* Interfaces don't add much value - you still need to repeat the interface fields in the concrete type . It's worth noting that every graphql type is an interface (strictly speaking)
* Unions cause a lot of problems. They reflect bad API design, they require confusing queries, and they generate bad code on both client-side and server-side

### Deprecation
* Use an annotation to do deprecation for fields on output types
* You can't deprecate fields on an `input` type (!)

## API Design

### Guidelines

### General hints
* Use the graph structure

## About Me
I have been a professional ("paid") software developer for about 2 decades now. I have created and maintained general-purpose GraphQL API's in production.
Previously I have had extensive experience with RESTful API's, and before that Webservices/SOAP, JSON-RPC, ICE, XML-RPC, CORBA and so on.

Consequently I can give you some good reasons why SOAP in particular was a mess and why the RESTful movement was revolutionary in that context. Of course, nobody needs to know or understand this in order to benefit from GraphQL - but it provides me with the clarity and perspective to find the good in a movement that consciously rejects REST, whilst avoiding the pitfalls of history.

Commit message:

Update description of semantics for operations

README.md, after:

# Pragmatic GraphQL
A hype-free guide to GraphQL for server-side developers, with a touch of snark

## Introduction

### What is GraphQL
GraphQL is a new RPC system. That is, it is in the same category as REST, Webservices/SOAP, gRPC, XML-RPC and CORBA.

### Advantages
The key distinctive of GraphQL is that it gives the API client fine-grained control over the fields returned from an API call (the data shape). This addresses a number of issues around over-requesting, that are present in most other RPC systems.

### Disadvantages
GraphQL is not a mature technology for general-purpose use. A number of operational and development considerations are not adequately addressed at the moment (as of late 2019).

## Community

### Context
The GraphQL movement is actually 3 things:
1. The internal communication protocol for a specific technology stack (Apollo/Relay).
2. A reaction against some of the more onerous aspects of the dominant RESTful approach to implementing API's, with it's roots in a specific part of the software engineering community.
3. A tool for creating flexible general-purpose API's.

It is helpful to remember this context because whilst a lot of the online discussion about GraphQL appears to be about point 3 (GraphQL as an API technology), in reality it is often about points 1 or 2. I suspect sometimes the authors are not clear on this distinction either :-/

## Requests

### Network Protocol
Requests are implemented as a text body in a HTTP(S) POST to a single URL (it is also possible, but unwise, to use HTTP GET with a URL-encoded GraphQL request). Responses usually have HTTP status code 200, but some servers may use a HTTP status of 400 for some errors.

### Operations
There are 3 types of request (called "operations"). Each operation type has an associated semantic meaning, but that is largely irrelevant (there is no enforcement of these semantics at the specification-level, and very little tooling appears to utilise it) so you can just ignore it and remix the operations to suit your own semantics based on their defined behaviour.

1. "query": Function call with parameters, parallel execution, structured response. Semantically intended for read-only data querying.
2. "mutation": Function call with parameters, blocking sequential execution, structured response. Semantically intended for data writes (create/update/delete).
3. "subscription": Function call with parameters, structured response with server-push streaming data. Semantically intended for long-timespan read-only data streaming.

### Errors
Over the wire, responses usually have HTTP status code 200, even if there was a functional error. As-of 2020, there is also a trend to use HTTP status code 400 if there was an error resolving any field in the response (although the remainder of the response would still be returned as per normal semantics). Note that GraphQL clients should also be prepared to handle HTTP status code 500 (for catastrophic server errors), along with network errors.

The approach of using HTTP 400 for any field errors needs to be be discussed in a bit more detail. It has the advantage of utilising the builtin status-code error handling in the HTTP clients that every GraphQL client is built on, so that errors can be guaranteed to result in a client-side error - rather than having a badly written client blindly rely on incomplete data, for instance. However, the disadvantage is that detailed error handling is discarded in favour of an all-or-nothing status code (eg. there is no distinction between bad query structure, a missing object, and an internal timeout fetching data - let alone partial data responses). My opinion is that if you are going to create a network-protocol-independent API system, then it doesn't make sense to partially break that paradigm for the sake of misbehaving client-side code - so it seems wisest to avoid this pattern.

There is an unofficial extension for embedding error information into the graphql response (Apollo error format). There is a further extension-extension for embedding error codes into the error information for programmatic error handling (`error_code` field). However, there are no extension-extension-extension's for well-defined error codes or annotating your schema to indicate valid error codes for particular fields or operations

## Types

### Gotchas
* input types (`input`) are different from return types (`type`). This is a bad idea.
* input types have a lot of limitations. No good reason, just cause.
* Interfaces don't add much value - you still need to repeat the interface fields in the concrete type . It's worth noting that every graphql type is an interface (strictly speaking)
* Unions cause a lot of problems. They reflect bad API design, they require confusing queries, and they generate bad code on both client-side and server-side

### Deprecation
* Use an annotation to do deprecation for fields on output types
* You can't deprecate fields on an `input` type (!)

## API Design

### Guidelines

### General hints
* Use the graph structure

## About Me
I have been a professional ("paid") software developer for about 2 decades now. I have created and maintained general-purpose GraphQL API's in production.
Previously I have had extensive experience with RESTful API's, and before that Webservices/SOAP, JSON-RPC, ICE, XML-RPC, CORBA and so on.

Consequently I can give you some good reasons why SOAP in particular was a mess and why the RESTful movement was revolutionary in that context. Of course, nobody needs to know or understand this in order to benefit from GraphQL - but it provides me with the clarity and perspective to find the good in a movement that consciously rejects REST, whilst avoiding the pitfalls of history.
